Add documentation for flattening and grains (#993)
AFM-SPM/TopoStats: docs/basic/flattening.md

# Flattening

Flattening is the process of taking a raw AFM image, and removing the artefacts that are present in the image,
resulting in an image where the background mica is flat and the sample is clearly visible resting on the surface.

Here is a raw, unprocessed AFM image:

![raw AFM image](../_static/images/flattening/flattening_raw_afm_image.png)

You can see there is a heavy tilt in the image, as well as a lot of horizontal banding. These artefacts are removed
during the flattening process in TopoStats.

## TL;DR

Images are processed by:

- Row alignment (make each row median the same height)
- Tilt & polynomial removal (fit a plane and quadratic polynomial to the image and subtract)
- Scar removal (remove long, thin, bright streaks in the data)
- Zero the average height (lower the image by its median height) to make the background roughly centred at zero nm
- Masking (detect objects on the surface and flatten the image again, ignoring the data on the surface)
- Secondary flattening (re-process the data using the mask to tell us where the background is)
- Gaussian filter (to remove jitteryness / noise)

> ![flattening pipeline](../_static/images/flattening/flattening_pipeline.png)

Author: Would like to, but would take a while so I'll pass on this for now sorry 😅

## Row alignment

The first step in the flattening process is **row alignment**. Row alignment is a process that adjusts the height of
each row of the image so that they all share the same median height value. This gets rid of some of the horizontal
banding. This leaves an image where the rows are aligned, but the image still has a clear tilt.

![row alignment](../_static/images/flattening/flattening_align_rows.png)

## Tilt removal

After row alignment, tilt removal is applied. This is a simple process of fitting a plane to the image and subtracting
it, resulting in a mostly flat image, however as you can see in the following image, it's not perfect.

> Two images are provided here, one with the full z-range and one with an adjusted z-range to show the remaining
> artefacts better.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two images are provided here, one with the full z-range and one with an adjusted height range (z-range) to show 
the remaining artefacts better, such as the low regions or "shadows" on rows with lots of non-background data.
```

![tilt_removal_full_zrange](../_static/images/flattening/flattening_tilt_removal_full_zrange.png)

![tilt removal_better_viewing](../_static/images/flattening/flattening_tilt_removal.png)

## Polynomial removal

After the tilt, we remove the polynomial trends. In some images, there is also quadratic or occasionally cubic bowing to
the image too. We remove this by fitting a two dimensional quadratic polynomial to the image (in the horizontal
direction), and subtracting it from the image. We then do the same for a nonlinear polynomial (z = a*x*y) to eliminate
“saddle” trends in the data. We could do all of these at the same time, but we like to be able to see the iterative
differences.

> 

Author: Nah sorry 😞 bowing seems to be quite rare and I deleted my data example of it ages ago

## Scar removal

> We then run scar removal on the image. This is a special function that detects scars (long, thin, bright streaks in the

Reviewer: Are these always bright? can it handle low streaks like in the image you've provided?

data, caused by physical problems in the AFM process). We are using a different image here since our lovely
minicircles.spm image doesn’t have any scars.

![scarred image](../_static/images/flattening/flattening_scarred_image.png)

> ![scar removed](../_static/images/flattening/flattening_scar_removed.png)

Reviewer: Do you think height scale bars would be useful?

Author: I don't have any 😞 this is an old image and I no longer have the file

> **Note that scar removal can distort data, and it’s best to take data without scars if you can.**

Reviewer: ❤️

## Zero the average height

![height zeroing](../_static/images/flattening/flattening_height_zeroing.png)

> We then lower the image by its median height which causes the background of the image to be roughly centred at zero nm.
> This is important since both the AFM and these processing steps can cause your background height to not be zero, which
> would mean you would get the wrong heights for your data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We then lower the image by its mean height which causes the background of the image to be roughly centred at zero nm.
If this function is provided a foreground mask such as in the second iteration of flattening, this function zeros the data only on the background data.
Data zeroing is important since the raw AFM heights are relative, and these processing steps can shift the background height away from zero, so this makes it easier to obtain comparative height metrics.
```

Btw the averaging code is all based on means not medians:
```
if mask is None:
    mask = np.zeros_like(image)
mean = np.mean(image[mask == 0])
LOGGER.debug(f"[{self.filename}] : Zero averaging background : {mean} nm")
return image - mean
```

Author: ❤️

## Masking

Now consider that all the processing we have done has assumed that every pixel of the image is background. We assumed
that there were no objects on the surface, messing up our fitting, and row alignment. If there was a large amount of
DNA on one side of the image, then the slope will be affected by it, and so flatten the image poorly.

Because of this, once we have done our initial flattening, we detect our objects on the surface, and then flatten the
image again! But this time, ignoring the data on the surface, and only considering the background.

How do we do that?
Well first, we need to find the data on the surface. We do this by thresholding.

> The threshold is set by the config file (have a look!). Any pixels that are below the threshold, are considered
> background (sample surface). Any pixels that are above the threshold are considered to be data (useful sample objects).
> This binary classification allows us to make a binary mask of where is foreground data, and where is background.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The type of threshold (standard deviation - `std_dev`, absolute - `absolute`, otsu - `otsu`), and the threshold values are set by the config file (have a look!). Any pixels that are below the threshold, are considered
background (sample surface). Any pixels that are above the threshold are considered to be data (useful sample objects).
This binary classification allows us to make a binary mask of where is foreground data, and where is background.
```

For more information on thresholding and how to set it, see the [thresholding](thresholding.md) page.

Here is the binary mask for minicircle.spm:

![processed image so far](../_static/images/flattening/flattening_tilt_removal.png)

> ![binary mask](../_static/images/flattening/flattening_binary_mask.png)

Reviewer: Would it be worth using Illustrator to put these on the same line, mand maybe point out the threshold value on the height scale?

> So you can see how all the interesting high up parts are now masked in white, and the background is in black.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So you can see how all the interesting foreground (high) regions are now masked in white, and the background is in black.
```

> TopoStats can use this to only use the black regions in its calculations for slope removal, row alignment etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows TopoStats to use only the background (black pixels) in its calculations for slope removal, row alignment etc.
```

So we re-do all the previous processing, but with this new useful binary mask to guide us.

## Secondary flattening

After re-processing the data using the mask to tell us where the background is, we get a better, more accurately

> flattened image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
flattened image. We can see the "shadows" on rows with lots of data have now been flattened correctly.
```

From here, we can go on to do things like finding our objects of interest (grains) and get stats about them.

![secondary flattening](../_static/images/flattening/flattening_final_flattened_image.png)

## Gaussian filter

> Finally, we apply a Gaussian filter to the image to remove jitteriness and noise. This allows you to get smoother data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we apply a Gaussian filter to the image to smooth height differences and remove high-gain noise. This allows you to get smoother data
```

but will start to blur out important features if you apply it too strongly. The default strength is a sigma of 1.0, but
you can adjust this in the config file under `filter/gaussian_size`.

Here are some examples of different gaussian sizes:

### Strength: 0.01

![gaussian_filter_0](../_static/images/flattening/flattening_gaussian_filtered_0.png)

### Strength: 1.0

![gaussian_filter_01](../_static/images/flattening/flattening_gaussian_filtered_01.png)

### Strength: 2.0

![gaussian_filter_02](../_static/images/flattening/flattening_gaussian_filtered_02.png)

### Strength: 8.0

> ![gaussian_filter_08](../_static/images/flattening/flattening_gaussian_filtered_08.png)

Reviewer: Would it be easier to see if these were side-by-side like in a figure done in illustrator?
